CIS568: Game Design Practicum Spring 2015 

Shooter? Painter! 

1 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Shooter? Painter! is a fast-paced, highly intuitive game that allows anyone to be an artist. You 
take on the role of a recent art school graduate who’s been hired by an art museum to solve a 
major problem: burglars have stolen the museum’s entire collection; the only thing remaining are 
pictures of the paintings and you’re asked to recreate the original paintings to the best of your 
ability, allowing the museum to resume its operations. 

Combining elements of shooting and puzzle games, our game asks you to use touch-based input 
to project various types (e.g., different colors and sizes) of moving paintballs onto a canvas, 
thereby re-creating paintings one at a time. Your score is determined by the accuracy of your 
work, i.e., how close it is to the original painting. 

We believe that this game uniquely challenges players’ memory, dexterity, and visual perception 
skills, appealing to lovers of puzzles, shooting games, and visual art alike. The simple and fast-
paced game mechanics allow for quick, fun-fueled gameplay and a quick learning experience. 

The game is developed purely for mobile, touch-enabled platforms. We expect the end-to-end 
implementation to take 5 weeks or, assuming 3 part-time designers/developers, 140 man-hours. 

Note: throughout the document, “V2:” sections denote features to be tested / implemented in a 
more advanced version of the game, once the basic functionality has been successfully develop. 

2 GAME DESIGN -CREATIVE 

2.1 High Concept 
Combining elements of shooting and puzzle games, our game asks the player to project various 
types (e.g., different colors and sizes) of paintballs onto a canvas, thereby re-creating a painting 
that’s been displayed at the beginning of the play session. Paintballs are randomly generated at 
the canvas boundaries and moving around the canvas (e.g., floating, bouncing); they can be 
projected onto the canvas by tapping them with a finger. The player’s score is determined by the 
accuracy of her work, i.e., how similar it is to the original painting. 

2.2 Design Goals 
2.2.1 Main Design Features 
2.2.1.1 Player goals and objectives. 
The player’s high-level goal is to pass a series of levels to win the game. On a 
per-level basis, the player’s goal is to create a painting that is as close as possible to the 

1 


original (primary goal), using as few paintballs as possible (secondary goal); this 
maximizes her in-game score. 

Winning condition: each individual level is won by hitting a certain threshold on 
the primary goal metric, % completion of the painting at hand (i.e., X% of the painting 
needs to have been recreated accurately). A level is completed either when the painting is 
100% completed or when the player runs out of paintballs (whichever happens first). The 
overall game is won / played through once the player has won all the levels, i.e., recreated 
all the paintings. 

Example of original painting to be recreated in the game: 


2.2.1.2 Main rules and procedures 
Level selection / museum view: before playing a level in the canvas view, the 
player needs to select a level to play using the level selection / museum view, i.e., by 
clicking on the desired level canvas. After playing a level in the canvas view, the 
museum view is reactivated. If the level was successfully completed, with a score higher 
than the previously achieve , the museum’s painting and score entries for this level is 
updated to reflect the latest game. Otherwise, the museum’s collection remains 
unchanged. 

Canvas view: at the start of a level, a painting appears on a canvas and then 
vanishes, leaving behind only an outline / frame that delineates same-color areas in the 
original painting. The player is then asked to project various types (e.g., different colors 
and sizes) of paintballs onto the canvas, thereby re-creating the original painting. 
Paintballs are randomly generated at the canvas boundaries and moving around the 
canvas (e.g., floating, bouncing); they can be projected onto the canvas by tapping them 
with a finger. Only tapping a ball of the right color at the right position contributes to 
finishing the painting and thus to increasing the player’s score. To help align a given 
paintball’s trajectory with a targeted area on the canvas, the player has the option to 
manipulate the canvas, through (1) translation and (2) rotation. The player is able, at any 
time, to put the game on hold by pressing a pause button (and resuming the game by 
pressing the same button again). 

One of two events can lead to the end of a level: (1) the targeted painting completion 
threshold has been achieved or (2) the player has run out of resources. In either case, the 
player’s final score is calculated and control is handed back to the level selection view. 
Core game loop: (1) a ball is generated on the canvas and follows a predefined trajectory 

2 


(e.g., floating along a straight line or bouncing off the southern canvas boundary); (2) the 
user follows / predicts the ball’s trajectory and manipulates the canvas (through 
translation and/or rotation) as needed for the ball to pass over a targeted area; (3) as the 
ball passes over an area of the same color, the player may decide to tap the ball, 
projecting it onto the canvas in that location; (4) the player’s score increases, and visual 
and audio feedback is generated to instantaneously reflect how well the ball was placed. 

2.2.1.3 Player Resources 
On a per-level basis, the player’s resource in the game are paintballs of different 
colors. These paintballs need to be projected on the canvas in a manner that recreates as 
much as possible the original painting, using as few balls as possible. 

2.2.1.4 Conflicts 
Obstacles: the combination of (1) a given painting to recreate and (2) a given 
pattern for generating paintballs during a level can be perceived as a puzzle to be solved 
by the player 

Constraints: 

(a) the paintballs generated throughout a given level are limited in number; the 
current paintball inventory (by color) is displayed next to the canvas and gives the player 
a real-time perspective on the resources still available. This inventory is depleted by 
projecting paintballs onto the canvas or paintballs colliding with a canvas boundary, upon 
which they vanish (exception: bouncing paintballs bounce off the southern canvas 
boundary) which puts pressure on the player to use paintballs judiciously / in a timely 
manner. When the player runs out of paintballs, the game session ends 
(b) the paintballs follow trajectories that are generated by the game and cannot be 
influenced by the player; these trajectories thus strongly limit the player’s degrees of 
freedom in projecting paintballs onto the canvas. 
(c) image of original painting is only shown temporarily, at the beginning of a 
session; the game thus also becomes a test of the player’s memory 
Boundaries: canvas boundaries define the total game field and absorb paintballs 
upon collision. Painting outlines define the fields to be colored by paintballs of a certain 
color. 

2.2.2 Appeal 
The game incorporates elements of both puzzle and casual shooting games and 
thus targets players who enjoy either of those genres. Given the game’s highly intuitive 
gameplay and light-hearted touch and feel, it can be enjoyed by players of all age 
categories, as long as they’re able to operate touch-based devices at a reasonable speed. 

The game’s appeal is created by a unique combination of 5 elements: 

(1) solving puzzles: direct intellectual stimulus and satisfaction from successfully passing 
a level 
3 


(2) vivid feedback: gratification from instant visual, audio, and score feedback 
upon projecting paintballs onto the canvas. To make things less predictable, some of this 
feedback is randomly generated, e.g., the color splatters on canvas 
(3) engaging in creative process: satisfaction from producing own paintings and 
being able to share them / go back to them later; user investment expected to increase 
retention 
(4) physical learning effect: with game progression, satisfaction of gradually 
developing better vision / touch coordination and an ability to manage an increasing 
number of paintballs concurrently 
2.2.3 Look and Feel 
The game will have a light-hearted look and feel, with fast, action-packed game 
play and vivid / bright colors in an arcade style. In that sense, it will show some similarity 
with games such as Candy Crush and FruitNinja. 

Candy Crush: FruitNinja: 


2.3 Worlds, Characters and Story 
2.3.1 Back Story 
The player takes on the role of an art school graduate who’s been hired by an art 

museum to solve a major problem: burglars recently broke into the museum and stole its 

entire collection; the only thing remaining are pictures of the original paintings. The 

player is therefore asked to recreate the original paintings to the best of her ability, as per 

the pictures of the originals. Fulfilling this mission will allow the museum to resume its 

operations. 

Rather than evolving as the player progresses in the game or being tightly 

integrated with the gameplay, this story provides a static context in which the game takes 

place. It explains why the player works her way through a series of (increasingly 

complex) paintings and is visualized through a dedicated “progression view” that shows 

all the paintings that the user has successfully recreated to-date. 

4 


2.3.2 Spaces/Worlds 
All levels take place within the same view, namely that of the canvas (see below). 
This canvas has the following elements: 

● 
Modifiable area (center): area onto which balls can be projected, i.e., that 
contains the painting being created 
● 
Score caption (top boundary): displays the player’s score in real-time 
● 
Pause button (top boundary): allows the player to pause / unpause the 
game at any point in time 
● 
Ball inventory captions (right boundary): one caption per color, indicating 
the number of balls remaining of that color 
Canvas: 


V2: to provide more diversity, one could consider embedding the canvas into a 
background picture and varying that background across levels and/or according to 
time of the day. 

A second view, the level selection / museum view (see below), serves the follow 
purposes: 

● 
It allows the player to horizontally scroll through and contemplate the 
paintings of the levels that she’s beaten so far. Selecting a painting reveals 
the score achieved with that painting and a button for replaying the level. 
● 
It allows the player to select, through click, the next level to play; this can 
be either a level that’s already been played (i.e., in order to achieve a score 
higher than the currently stored one) or the lowest level that has not yet 
been beaten. 
Level selection/museum: 

5 


2.3.3 Characters 
Technically, the game involves a single character, namely the art graduate 
controlled by the player herself. However, since the core gameplay doesn’t 
involve this character in any shape or form, the character is not actually depicted 
in the game. 

V2: to encourage the player to further invest into the game, one could create a 
fully customizable avatar that is present on the screen throughout the game and 
visually evolves as the player progresses. This likely won’t add anything to the 
gameplay. 

2.3.4 Levels of Difficulty 
The level of difficulty increases as the player progresses in the game, i.e., reaches 
higher levels. A higher degree of difficulty is realized by: 

(1) greater complexity of paintings, incl. more colors, smaller same-color 
areas etc. 
(2) more challenging ball characteristics, e.g., different size, faster / more 
convoluted movement 
(3) more balls concurrently present on the screen 
2.4 Interaction Models 
2.4.1 User Interface -Navigation and Movement 
Within a level, the user interface offers 4 ways of interacting with the game: 

(1) Tapping the Pause button (1 finger): pauses/unpauses the game 
(2) Tapping a ball (1 finger): projects the ball onto the canvas, at the ball’s 
current location 
(3) Tapping and translating the canvas itself (3 fingers): allows to move the 
canvas around, without rotation 
(4) Tapping and rotating the canvas itself (3 fingers): allows to rotate the 
canvas, without translation 
Canvas: 

6 


V2: (a) the ball inventory captions turn into selectable buttons; selecting a button 
of a certain color prioritizes the generating of balls of that color. This could 
enable more strategic play (details tbd); (b) instead of limiting the player’s input 
to tapping paintballs, one could allow for swipes. The direction and intensity of a 
swipe would be reflected in the color splatters resulting from the projecting of 
paintballs onto the canvas; (c) instead of limiting the canvas manipulation to 
rotating and translating, we’d like to test whether resizing is a useful degree of 
freedom. 

2.4.2 Game Play Sequence and Levels 
7 


2.4.3 User/Environment – Obstacles and Props 
The objects in the canvas view are the following: paintball(s), same-color areas of 
the original painting, canvas, canvas boundaries 

The player interacts with the paintballs by tapping on them. A successful tap on a 
ball (i.e., collision between player tap and paintball object) projects the same ball onto the 
canvas, resulting in color splatters in the ball’s most recent location. At the same time, the 
game checks for a collision between the ball and same-color areas of the original 
painting; if a collision is found and the color matches, scoring is adjusted accordingly. 
The ball is destroyed. 

The player interacts with the canvas through three-finger touch moves that 
represent translation or rotation, as described previously. 

Upon collision with a canvas boundary, balls are destroyed (exception: bouncing 
balls bounce off the southern boundary). 

2.4.4 User/Character 
No interaction with the main character. 
V2: the player is able to customize her character, e.g., by dressing it differently. 

2.4.5 Character/Character 
<n/a> 

2.4.6 Motion Tracking 
n/a 

V2: track the direction and intensity of single-finger swiping motions used to 
project balls onto the canvas. 

2.4.7 Multi-Player 
n/a 

2.4.8 Mobile 
The game will be built purely for mobile / touch-enabled devices, and leverages 
touch-based input as described above. 

2.4.9 Networked Play 
n/a 
V2: instead of displaying the simple candy-crush like mechanism> 

8 


2.5 Performance and Scoring 
2.5.1 State Variables 
The following variables are necessary to save/restore or pause/resume the game: 

● 
Overall game: 
○ 
Player level: highest level that’s been successfully beat 
○ 
For each level previously beat: latest score and associated painting 
● 
Within individual level: 
○ 
Current player score 
○ 
Paintball resources (per color) 
○ 
State of all balls currently alive in the canvas 
○ 
State of painting (i.e., balls previously projected on the canvas) 
2.5.2 Feedback 
The only negative feedback mechanism currently employed by the game is the 
difficulty that gradually increases with the level. 

2.5.3 Performance and Progress Metrics 
At the overall game level, progress is monitored through the levels that have 
already been beaten, and the score achieved on each of these levels. The game is 
won by beating all levels. 

Within an individual level, progress is monitored through three metrics: 

(1) the share of the original painting that has been recreated (in %). This 
metric gradually increases as balls are successfully placed on the canvas, 
(2) the player’s current score (in points). While the level is being played, this 
score increases every time (a) a paintball is successfully placed on an area 
of the same color as the ball (the score increase is determined by the 
accuracy of the placement and by the ball characteristics including speed 
and size) and/or (b) the share of the original painting that has been 
recreated increases. 
A game session ends either when the painting is 100% recreated or when the 
player runs out of paintballs (whichever happens first). The level is beaten only if 
a certain threshold on the % completion of the painting has been hit. 

3 GAME DESIGN -IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 

3.1 Design Assumptions 
3.1.1 Hardware 
800 MHz or higher CPU; 512 MB ram, Tegra 2, SGX 540, Mali 400, Adreno 205 
or higher, 30mb free space and 2.2+ Android. 

9 


http://best-gamesinfo.blogspot.com/2014/02/candy-crush-saga-for-androidphones.
html 
http://candycrushsaga.com/help/en 
https://support.halfbrick.com/hc/en-us/articles/202156094-What-are-the-systemrequirements-
for-Fruit-Ninja-Kakao


3.1.2 Software 
We will use Unity3D Game engine pro to develop the game. The game will be 
built for Android and ios platforms. 

3.1.3 Algorithms and Techniques 
Algorithms: 

● 
In game points updating: During the game, the score shown on the screen 
updates when the player shoot a ball. To implement this, we firstly reduce 
the size of original picture to get ride of details.Then compare the color of 
the ball on the canvas with the color of the original image. The more 
similar the two color is, the higher score the player will get. More 
specifically, for balls with radius r, we reduce the size of the original 
image (with pixel h*w) to (h/r * w/r) to make sure each ball represents one 
single pixel on the shrunk image. 
● 
Overall similarity comparison: After each level is finished, we would use a 
simple image similarity comparison algorithm to estimate the completion 
of the painting and calculate the final score. Below are the basic process of 
the algorithm: 
1) Reduce size : Shrink pictures to 8*8 with 64 total pixels. 
2) Reduce color : Convert 8*8 pictures to a gray-scale. 
3) Average the colors: Compute the mean value of the 64 
colors. 
4) Compute the bits : Set each bit based on whether the color 
value is above or below the mean 
5) Construct the hash : Set the 64 bits into a 64-bit integer. 
6) Compare the hash value of the origin painting and the 
player’s painting. 
7) (References: 1. 
http://www.hackerfactor.com/blog/?/archives/432-LooksLike-
It.html ; 
2.http://stackoverflow.com/questions/25977/how-can-imeasure-
the-similarity-between-two-images ; 3. 
https://code.google.com/p/mybackupcode/source/browse/tr 
unk/python/imgHash/imgHash.py?r=31 ) 

Plug-ins: 

● 
None 
Animation techniques: 

● 
Sprites for animation of ball splatters 
● 
Animation of elastic deformation for bouncing balls. 
10 


3.2 Storyboards 
3.3 Design Logic 
3.3.1 FSM -State/Effect 
The states of the game are shown below in the Game State Graph. Player starts to 
enter the level selection scene.With certain level selected, the player then enters 
the playing mode. During the time he/she is playing , he/she can pause and 
resume. As long as the player finished the level, the win or lose scene can take the 
player go back to the level selection scene. The player can also choose to restart 
this level. 

11 


During each Level, the game flow logic is shown in the Game Play Flowchart 
figure. 


For the user input during the game, we define 3 kinds of inputs. Single touch 
means shooting the ball. After the detection with a single touch, a ray is shooted 
towards the canvas, if the ray hits any ball, we then draw a split on the certain 
position on canvas. When there is three finger touches the screen, we then detect 
if they are rotating or moving the canvas. 

12 


3.3.2 User Solution/Actions 
To accomplish a level, the player needs to gain certain score. The score the player 
get are composed of two parts. The first part is immediate score that updates 
during the gameplay. When player shoot the right ball, he/she will get an instance 
score increase. The other part of the score is the final bonus score that is 
calculated and added to the total score only after the player finishes the whole 
level. 
The bonus score weighs more in the total score. Thus, to pass the level, the player 
should focus more on the overall look of the painting rather than shoots as many 
balls as possible. 

3.4 Software Versions 
3.4.1 Alpha Version Features (vertical slice through total experience) 
For our alpha version, our main goal is to get the core mechanics for shooting and 
scoring because we will be able to test different constraints for our beta version. 

Thus, the following set of features are to be included in the alpha version: 

13 


● 
Ball generation: We should be able to create randomized velocities and 
different colored balls from different angles 
● 
Ball physics: The ball should be able to bounce on the floor and ceiling of 
the canvas and leave the canvas from the left and right 
● 
Shooting: The basic touch implementation to painting the canvas should 
be in place. Additionally, the canvas should be painted on the canvas. 
● 
Scoring: A basic scoring scheme should be in place that depends on the 
percentage of the canvas colored correctly. 
● 
Scenes: There should be one level (faded painting in the background) and 
an end game scene. 
3.4.2 Beta Version Features 
For our beta version, our main goal is to have more advanced mechanics and 
more functionality in general. However, after playtesting, some of the mechanics 
may not make it to the beta version because the game does not feel fun. 

Thus, the following set of features are to be included in the beta version: 

● 
Scenes: There should be multiple levels, and end game scene, and a level 
selection scene. 
● 
Pause screen: There will be a pause button and a pause screen. 
● 
Swiping: A swiping implementation to break the balls will be 
implemented. 
● 
Ball manipulation: Some sort of mechanic to manipulate the ball 
physics/path. 
● 
Canvas manipulation: The canvas should be able to resize, translate a bit, 
and rotate using touch controls. 
● 
Effects: Basic animation and audio will be implemented. 
3.4.3 Description of Self-running Demos 
The self-running demo should show off the ball physics from different angles and 
velocity, shooting the ball, the painting of the canvas, and the end game screen. 
All features should be demoable with their respective versions. 

4 WORK PLAN 

4.1 Tasks 
Description Time Member 
1 Task: Ball mechanics All necessary ball mechanics in the 
game. 
1 day SC 

14 


1.1 Subtask: Bouncing off 
floor but nothing else 
As described. 0.5 days SC 
1.2 Subtask: Ball generation The ball should have a random velocity, 
angle, and a set color based on resources. 
0.5 days SC 
2 Task: UI Making the UI be user friendly and 
look nice. 
4 days SC 
2.1 Subtask: Make the in-
game screen/UI. 
Make the level user friendly (eg the 
pause button is in an aesthetically and 
functionally pleasing place) 
1 day SC 
2.2 Subtask: Make pause 
screen. 
Make a usable pause screen. 0.5 days SC 
2.3 Subtask: Making the 
level selection screen. 
Make the level selection user friendly (eg 
with scrolling) 
2 days SC 
2.4 Subtask: Making the end 
game screen. 
Make both screens where the player wins 
and loses 
0.5 days SC 
3 Task: Level Design Design all of the different levels 4 days SC/ZZ 
3.1 Subtask: Design levels 
of varying difficulty 
design as many levels as possible that 
vary in complexity. 
2 days SC/ZZ 
3.2 Subtask: Tuning Tune how many resources the player 
should get at each level. 
2 day SC/ZZ 
4 Task: Touch 
mechanics 
All user interaction in game 13 days AH 
4.1 Subtask: Basic shooting Click on a ball, ball disappears and paints 
on canvas 
5 days AH 
4.2 Subtask: Swiping Swipe a ball, ball disappears and paints 
on canvas 
3 days AH 
4.3 Subtask: Canvas 
manipulation 
Pinch to resize, 2-finger translate to 
translate, 2-finger rotate to rotate 
5 days AH 
4.4 Subtask: Ball 
manipulation 
Different inputs to change the 
physics/path of the ball 
2 days AH 
5 Task: Effects All visual and audio effects 9 days ZZ 
5.1 Subtask: Animations Get splatter animation, point animation as 
well as other necessary animation 
5 days ZZ 

15 


5.2 Subtask: Modeling Make the balls, the canvas, look good 3 days ZZ 
5.3 Subtask: Audio Make sound effects for different hits and 
background music 
1 day ZZ 
6 Task: Scoring Score the player 3 days AH 

4.2 Milestones 
4.2.1 Minor 
● 
Ball generation 
● 
Ball physics 
● 
Shooting 
● 
Scoring 
● 
Scenes 
● 
Pause screen 
● 
Swiping 
● 
Ball manipulation 
● 
Canvas manipulation 
● 
Effects 
4.2.2 Major 
Alpha Version 

The alpha version should just have the core mechanics of the game namely, 
balls should generate and bounce on the floor, touching a ball 
should paint the canvas and disappear, scores should be calculated, and an 
end screen display should show after a level ends. 

Beta Versions 

The beta version should have more complex mechanics in the game. 
Through playtesting we will possibly include the following: swiping, 
canvas manipulation, ball manipulation. There will be some basic 
animation and audio. There will be multiple levels of varying difficulty 
and a pause screen. 

4.3 Development Schedule 
Organize your work plan tasks in the form of a Gantt chart. List all the major tasks and 
subtasks (including durations) and the dates of each minor (weekly) milestone and major 
milestone (e.g. alpha, beta, final). Please use Microsoft Project for the creation of the 
Development Schedule. 

16 


17 


18 


